---
title: 2025
layout: home-with-socials
nav_order: 9
parent: Google Summer Of Code
grand_parent: Development
---

# Ideas Page for Google Summer of Code 2025
{: .no_toc }

We are thrilled to share our carefully curated project ideas for this year's Google Summer of Code.

## General Information
{: .no_toc }

These ideas are just some topics we came up with, where currently nobody is working on. However, Catrobat is a project with a wide range of possibilities and we're aware of our blindspots: So let's live the spirit of Open Source and come up with improvements (e.g., new features, extensions, ...) that are related to the project and in which you're interested in. We do have many senior contributors who would be happy to mentor such a project. Don't be shy and check out the last point on the list: Your idea!

## General Knowledge Prerequisites for all Projects
{: .no_toc }

- Knowledge in the usage of Git and GitHub
- Basic knowledge in the concepts of software testing (e.g., test doubles) and test-driven development
- Basic knowledge in app development (for Android and iOS projects)
- Java, JUnit, Mockito, Robotium and Espresso for Android development
- Swift and Objective C for iOS development
- Also please check that you have the proper hardware for the development (e.g., a Android/iOS smartphone for testing, Mac for iOS development)

## Idea Overview
{: .no_toc }

1. TOC
{:toc}

## Project Descriptions
{: .no_toc }

### Pocket Paint Flutter

175 or 350 Hours
{: .label .label-blue }

{: .highlight  }
> **Required Skills**: Flutter, Dart, Android-Development, Agile Development <br>
> **Difficulty level**: To Be Determined (tbd) 

The developer should have knowledge of Flutter. Develop and implement missing tools in Flutter that exist in our old Android app built with Android Native.

<hr>

### Awesome Demo Game Project on Marine Biology
350 Hours
{: .label .label-blue }

{: .highlight  }
> **Required Skills**: Coding Basics<br>
> **Possible Mentors**: Selina Ernst, Wolfgang Slany <br>
> **Difficulty level**: Medium 

Spend the whole GSoC time developing and designing a demo game. This year's focus of Catrobat includes topics around marine biology as an application area, and we have several projects around the general topic. The present project aims at inspiring young people to become aware of topics related to the protection of marine habits by creating related video games of their own. If you have your own original idea about a game around this topic, please feel free to suggest it. Please note that the demo game will be published under Catrobat’s free open source license, and that the game will thus become part of the Catrobat FLOSS project’s source code. Thus, all artwork, sounds, character names etc must be compatible with our licenses, i.e., freely publishable under our licenses, the AGPL version 3 and CC BY-SA 4.0, or under a compatible, possibly even freer license such as CC0.

<hr>

### Your own Project Ideas ...
90, 175 or 350 Hours
{: .label .label-blue }

{: .highlight  }
> **Required Skills**: Kotlin, Java, Android-Development, iOS-Development, Agile Development <br>
> **Requirement**: self-organized work <br>
> **Difficulty level**: advanced

In the last years we found that you have many great ideas and knowledge! We're aware that there are many ways how to improve performance, reduce memory usage, make our services more stable and of course the code easier to maintain. We're sure you do have ideas how to achieve this, although we may have never heard of this approach before -> that's the great thing about Open Source! And well, that's also the experience we made at last year's GSoC - and we liked it!

Also new features or extensions for iOS and Android are welcome to be introduced to us. Help us to spread coding and Open Source!
